Traffic Manager impacting Multiple Services
Summary of impact: Between 19:45 and 20:05 UTC on 30 Nov 2016, customers located primarily in the Asia-Pacific geographic region may have experienced failures attempting to connect to a subset of Azure customer resources and platform services. Alerts were received, and engineers were able to correlate failures to Azure Traffic Manager services. During this time, DNS resolution requests for domain records on the Azure Traffic Manager services in the Asia-Pacific region did not receive a response, resulting in timeouts. To mitigate the impact on customers and their services, engineers removed the Asia-Pacific Traffic Manager services from the Anycast advertisement. Traffic Manager services in other regions handled these requests until the Asia-Pacific regional services were fully restored. Customer impact: Customers experienced failures or timeouts reaching resources, sites and services which relied on Traffic Manager DNS resolution. Workaround: None Root cause and mitigation: Maintenance was being completed on network devices in the Asia-Pacific region. Work to be completed increased resiliency and scalability of our network infrastructure. A misconfiguration resulted in inbound routing failure through one of the devices critical to the path of the Traffic Manager services. Telemetry used in monitoring this change in real-time was afterward determined to have been insufficient for this class of device. The engineers performing this maintenance activity received alerts for Traffic Manager, and withdrew the devices in the Asia-Pacific region mitigating the availability impact. Engineers identified the problem, reviewed the proposed fix, and implemented the fix, fully restoring Traffic Manager services in the region. Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future, and in this case it includes (but is not limited to): 1. Automated configuration validation pre and post change, 2.Device specific telemetry integration into change automation, to validate, pause or rollback based on real-time health signals, 3.Add geographic redundancy at the DNS name server level – Complete. Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://survey.microsoft.com/240331
