RCA for Network Infrastructure in West Europe 
Summary of impact: Between 22:29 and 23:45 UTC on the 10 Dec 2016, customers in the West Europe region may have experienced intermittent periods of connectivity issues. This included elevated packet loss and latency to other Azure regions, and inbound/outbound Internet traffic. Network traffic within the region was unaffected during this time. The connectivity loss was a result of an issue in the traffic engineering software on our network routers that failed to route traffic around a fiber issue in the network. Approximately 10% of the traffic failed to reroute to the redundant fiber path. Customer impact: The software bug caused 10% elevated packet drop and latency to traffic to other data centers and to the Internet for a subset of the customers in West Europe. Workaround: There is no workaround for this network issue. Root cause and mitigation: We encountered a software issue on our network routers that caused routing calculations to take longer than expected during a fiber issue in West Europe. The path computation slowdown caused traffic to be dropped instead of moving to the redundant fiber path. Our telemetry detected the issue and we were able to shift traffic to an unaffected path before the underlying fiber problem was resolved. During this impact period, traffic through the device in West Europe was impaired. To prevent a recurrence of this issue, we have added monitoring for the software issue to alert us before the constraint can impact traffic. In addition, there is continuous work towards installing a permanent software correction for the issue. Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future, and in this case it includes (but is not limited to): 1. Improve monitoring to more rapidly indicate when a router device is in this state. Monitoring did detect the traffic issue was occurring, but did not point to the impacted device. 2. Create and load a patch for the impacted routers for the software bug. Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://survey.microsoft.com/246853
