RCA - Intermittent Authentication Failures due to Underlying Azure Active Directory issues
Summary of impact: Between approximately 19:32 and 20:12 UTC on 10 May 2017, a subset of customers may have experienced difficulties or received failure notifications when attempting to authenticate into their resources that are dependent on Azure Active Directory Service. The issue was caused by a configuration change that was incorrectly deployed to Azure Active Directory production. The change was rolled back promptly, which mitigated the incident at 20:12 UTC. Customer impact: Impacted services for this issue included Azure Management Portal, Visual Studio Team Services, Azure Log analytics, App Service (Web Apps), Azure Machine Learning, Application Insights, Azure Stream Analytics, and Azure Scheduler. Root cause and mitigation: We have a stringent process in place for all deployments to help ensure that the impact is minimal when bad configurations are introduced. Unfortunately, this process was not closely followed resulting in an unintentional configuration change being rolled out to the Azure Active Directory production services. This issue was detected promptly by our monitoring systems alerting our on-call engineers on a large drop in successful user authentication. The configuration change was rolled back immediately to resolve the incident. Next steps: We sincerely apologize to our customers impacted by this incident. We have already taken, and are continuing to take measures to address the learnings in this incident. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to): 1. Continue to automate all stages of the Azure Active Directory release management and deployment process. [In progress] 2. Continue to adopt safe deployment principle of progressive rollout for configurations integrated with quality of service and health monitoring as controlling gates. This has been completed for regular code deployments, and work is in progress for configuration updates. 3. Identify early signals to trigger notification processes to reduce time to notify customers [In progress]. Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://survey.microsoft.com/363702
