RCA - Increased latency accessing Azure resources
Summary of impact: Between 23:52 UTC on 21 Mar 2017 and 01:14 UTC on 22 Mar 2017, a subset of customers around the South East US may have seen latency and failures accessing Microsoft services including Azure resources. This was due to an infrastructure event impacted by a facilities issue at a 3rd party regional routing site located in South East US. Azure Engineering teams executed standard procedures to redirect traffic and isolate the impacted facility restoring expected routing availability. Customer impact: A small subset of customers would have observed increased latency or network timeouts while accessing their services on Azure. For a brief period of time, certain customers had significant packet loss that prevented them from reaching Azure sites in the Eastern United States. Root cause and mitigation: Azure East US Datacenters are connected to the network backbone through a 3rd party network peering site. Due to severe weather in the Atlanta, Georgia, one of the 3rd party peering sites experienced an infrastructure event resulting in loss of cooling. The network equipment in this site started to have increased temperature, and was shutdown to prevent failure. The automated peering load and fail out to a secondary region did not work as expected. This resulted in partial network interruption between Azure Data centers and the Internet, resulting in increased latency and timeouts for customers. Azure Engineering teams worked on manually shifting the traffic to alternate peering sites in East US to resolve the issue. Mitigation of congestion was achieved on 22 Mar 2017 at 01:14 UTC. Cooling was restored to the site, and the routers were recovered to normal operation, after which full peering capacity was restored to the Networking site. Next steps: We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future, and in this case, it includes (but is not limited to): 1. Fix and improve the automated peer offloading and balancing logic between sites which prevented safe failover. 2. Investigate and fix the infrastructure issues through vendor co-ordination. Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://survey.microsoft.com/349643
