Infrastructure issue impacting multiple Azure services - Australia East
Summary of impact: Between 22:19 and 22:46 UTC on 6 October 2017, a subset of customer resources and services were impacted by network availability loss in a portion of the Australia East region. Facility engineers were quickly aware, took steps to remediate the issue, and network availability was restored by 22:39 UTC. Azure infrastructure and customer resources largely recovered in the few minutes following. Customer impact: Because network connectivity was lost between some Virtual Machines and storage resources, VMs would have been shut down and then restarted once connectivity was restored. Additional impacted services include Cloud Services, Azure Search, Service Bus, Event Hub, DevTest Lab, Azure Site Recovery, Azure Key Vault, Visual Studio Team Services, and may have experienced latency or loss in availability to/from portions of the Australia East region. Root cause and mitigation: During a planned facility power maintenance activity, power was removed from a single feed. No impact was expected from this planned activity, as there are redundant power feeds in the facility. Facility engineers were in the datacenter monitoring this planned activity, and detected unexpected breaker trips on the redundant feeds shortly after the start of maintenance. Engineers performed immediate investigation, and determined that the datacenter spine network devices in the portion of the facility impacted by the power maintenance had lost power. Engineers mitigated the loss of power to these devices by distributing load across additional circuits restoring network connectivity. A review of the datacenter spine network devices revealed that these devices were not power striped across feeds optimally to be resilient to loss of one of the two power feeds. The devices have been subsequently corrected in this facility, and Microsoft is reviewing design and implementation worldwide for these devices. All other devices, servers, and infrastructure maintained availability, as expected during the maintenance. The maintenance was completed without any further impact as originally expected. Azure networks are designed to be resilient to loss of individual or even multiple datacenter spine devices, however, due to the unexpected breaker trips, all devices in this physical facility were impacted, resulting in a loss of connectivity within the facility and with other segments in the Australia East region. Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to): 1) Remediate known vulnerability in Australia East facility [COMPLETE] 2) Facility team continuing to work with network engineering on design review to audit and remediate worldwide. [PENDING] Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://survey.microsoft.com/481145
