ExpressRoute Circuit - Australia Southeast
Summary of impact: Between 01:00 UTC and 04:45 UTC on 02 Oct 2018, a subset of customers began facing intermittent packet loss in the Melbourne ExpressRoute location for Australia Southeast region. During the period of degradation, customers may have experienced intermittent packet loss when using an ExpressRoute circuit hosted on the Microsoft Enterprise Edge device (MSEE) experiencing this issue. Access to a Virtual Network and the corresponding resources using a Virtual Network Gateway and services hosted on public and Microsoft peering were also affected when connecting using the ExpressRoute service.
Root cause and mitigation: ExpressRoute, as with other Azure services, is designed and implemented in a highly available manner and architecture. ExpressRoute has multiple redundancies implemented in both software and hardware to ensure maximum uptime for customers. It was identified that an upstream physical port experienced a partial failure causing the connection between the ExpressRoute routers and the Microsoft global network to intermittently drop packets. Due the partial failure, the physical port was not removed from rotation successfully causing impact to customers consuming services.
Automatic detection mechanisms are in place to detect failure modes in the platform. The detection mechanisms triggered an internal alert and engineers engaged to begin troubleshooting. An unrelated issue had previously arisen that did not immediately make this issue apparent, causing a slight delay in mitigation. When engineers pinpointed the issue, the port was removed from rotation and services were immediately restored.
Next steps: We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future, and in this case, it includes (but is not limited to):
• Add additional monitoring parameters in our automated detection platform to better classify and alert on intermittent failures [In Progress]. • Modify existing processes to localize on faults and mitigate faster. Add automation where applicable [In Progress].