RCA - Networking Connectivity and Latency - East US
Summary of impact: Between 13:18 UTC and 22:40 UTC on 01 Aug 2018, a subset of customers in the East US region may have experienced difficulties or increased latency when connecting to some resources. 
Customer impact: This incident affected a single region, East US, and services deployed with georedundancy in multiple regions would not have been impacted. 
Root cause and mitigation: A fiber cut caused by construction approximately 5 km from Microsoft data centers resulted in multiple line breaks, impacting separate splicing enclosures that reduced capacity between 2 Azure data centers in the East US region. As traffic ramped up over the course of the day, congestion occurred and caused packet loss, particularly to services hosted in or dependent on one data center in the region.
Microsoft engineers reduced the impact to Azure customers by reducing internal and discretionary traffic to free up network capacity. Microsoft had been in preparations to add capacity between data centers in the region, and it completed the mitigation of the issue by pulling in the activation of the additional capacity. Repair of the damaged fiber continued after the mitigation, and it will be returned to service when fully ready.
Next steps: Microsoft regrets the impact to our customers and their services. We design our networks to survive the failure of any single component, however in this instance there was not enough capacity left after the failure to handle all offered traffic. To prevent recurrence, we are taking the following steps:
1) Reducing the ulizaon threshold for capacity augmentaon - in progress. 2) Improving our systems for automacally reducing discreonary traﬃc during congeson events to preserve performance for customer traﬃc - in progress. 3) Improving our ability to idenfy high-rate ﬂows that can cause impact to other traﬃc during congeson events and create appropriate ways to handle this traﬃc - in progress. 
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://aka.ms/CL78-G88 (https://aka.ms/CL78-G88)
