RCA - Multiple Azure Services availability issues and Service Management issues for a subset of Classic Azure resources - South Central US
Summary of impact: Between 15:57 UTC and 19:00 UTC on 13 Jun 2018 a subset of customers in South Central US may have experienced difficulties connecting to resources hosted in this region. Engineers have determined that this was caused by an underlying Storage availability issue. Other services that leverage Storage in this region may also be experienced impact related to this. These services may include: Virtual Machines, App Service, Visual Studio Team Services, Logic Apps, Azure Backup, Application Insights, Service Bus, Event Hub, Site Recovery, Azure Search, and Media Services. In addition, customers may have experienced failures when performing Service Management operations on their resources. Communications for Service Management operations issue is published to the Azure Portal.
Root cause and mitigation: One storage scale unit in the South Central US region experienced a significant increase in load, which caused increased resource utilization on the backend servers in the scale unit. The increased resource utilization caused several backend roles to become temporary unresponsive resulting in timeouts and other errors, which caused VMs and other storage dependent services to be impacted. The Storage service utilizes automatic load balancing to help automatically mitigate this type of incident, however in this case automatic load balancing was not sufficient and engineer intervention was required to mitigate the incident. To stabilize the scale unit and backend roles, engineers rebalanced the load. Impacted services recovered shortly thereafter. Engineers are continuing to investigate the cause for the increase in load and implement additional steps to help prevent a reoccurrence.  
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to): 1. Improve load balancing system to better manage the load across servers -pending 2. Improve resource usage management to better handle low resource situations – pending 3. Improve server restart time after an incident that results in degraded Storage availability – in progress 4. Improve fail over strategy to help ensure that impacted services can more quickly recover - in progress
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://aka.ms/3TP7-TM8 (https://aka.ms/3TP7-TM8)
