RCA - Service Availability Issue in North Europe
Summary of impact: From 17:44 on 19 Jun 2018 to 04:30 UTC on 20 Jun 2018, customers using Azure services in North Europe may have experienced connection failures when attempting to access resources hosted in the region. Customers leveraging a subset of Azure services may have experienced residual impact for a sustained period post-mitigation of the underlying issue.
Final root cause and mitigation: On 19 Jun 2018, Datacenter Critical Environments systems in one of our datacenters in the North Europe region experienced an increase in outside air temperature which triggered a confluence of events that contributed to this outage.
The humidity increase resulted in a datacenter control system requesting for evaporative cooling across the data center campus. When the call for cooling occurred, it uncovered issues within the controls system which led to failures within the mechanical system in the data centers. Manual intervention was required to help remediate the escalating temperature and humidity issues within the data center.  
The team’s manual intervention in conjunction with the control system issues did not immediately remediate the environmental issues. However the team was eventually able to clear and reset the control systems, bringing the data center cooling systems back in control lowering the temperature and humidity.
This unexpected rise in humidity levels in the operational areas caused multiple Top of Rack (TORs) network devices and hard disk drives supporting two Storage scale units in the region to experience hardware component failures. These failures caused significant latency and/or intra scale unit communications issues between the servers which led to availability issues for customers with data hosted on the affected scale units. 
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to):
1. Correct issues for datacenter evaporative cooling systems in the affected data center [complete] 2. Audit controls system and test functionalities [in progress] 3. Update standard and emergency operational procedures for environmental excursion [complete] 4. Engineers continue to analyze detailed event data to determine if additional environmental systems modifications are required [in progress]
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey: https://aka.ms/7THS-LY8 (https://aka.ms/7THS-LY8)
