RCA - Microsoft Azure Portal
Summary of impact: Between approximately 08:00 and 15:20 UTC on 01 Mar 2018, a subset of customers in West Europe and North Europe may have experienced degraded performance when navigating the Azure Management Portal and attempting to manage their resources. Some portal blades may have been slow to load. Customers may also have experienced slow execution times when running PowerShell commands using Azure Resource Manager templates. Retries may have succeeded. Root cause and mitigation: The Azure Management Portal has a dependency on a back end service called Azure Resource Manager (ARM). This dependency is called when attempting to view the properties deployed under ARM. ARM front end servers are distributed in regions close to the resources so they can manage incoming requests efficiently. During the impact window of this incident, a subset of front end servers in the UK South region intermittently experienced higher than expected CPU usage. This high usage introduced latency when processing incoming requests which degraded the overall portal experience and PowerShell command execution. Engineers determined that the UK South front end servers received increased traffic as a front end servers in the West Europe region were taken out of rotation for testing on February 28th. The increase in traffic was unexpected as steps had been taken to scale out front end servers in other regions mainly North Europe - to load balance the traffic. Upon investigation, engineers determined that the scale out operation in North Europe did not complete successfully due to ongoing deployment in that region. The issue was mitigated once additional instances were scaled out across proximity regions.
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to): 1. Improve our monitoring, detection and alerting of latency conditions. 2. Scale out to all Europe related regions when taking front end servers out of rotation in one of the Europe regions. 
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey: https://survey.microsoft.com/638079
