RCA - Azure Service Availability - France Central
Summary of impact: Between 13:57 and 16:45 UTC on 16 Oct 2018, a subset of customers may have experienced difficulties connecting to resources in the France
Central region. This impact was related to a number of Storage and Compute resources that experienced an unexpected power-down during this time.
Root cause and mitigation: A corrective maintenance activity related to the fire alarm system was taking place in one of the isolated zones (Colos) in the datacenter at the start of this event. While working on the system, the maintenance engineer inadvertently triggered the fire alarm for this Colo, which in normal circumstances would have alerted staff, but would not have caused any impact to running services in the Colo. However in this instance a separate legacy fire suppression system, with an automated power shutdown process, was also triggered by the fire alarm. The activation of this system triggered a general power shutdown process, and a number of storage and compute resources in this single Colo became unavailable as a result.
This legacy system was configured, pursuant to previous French insurance requirements, to automatically shut down power in the event of a fire suppression activation being triggered, and also to prevent backup power supplies from kicking in. This system was not supposed to be active, or able to trigger the shutdown of the power systems in this Colo.
The Engineers onsite performed a manual restoration of power in the Colo, and then brought the impacted Storage and Compute resources back online in a structured manner to ensure full data resilience, and complete service restoration. Engineers actively monitored the restoration process, and full service restoration was confirmed at 16:45 UTC, although most services would have recovered before this time.
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. Steps specific related to this incident include:
1. A complete review of the maintenance processes for fire systems in this region to eliminate false alarm triggers during these processes.
2. A full audit of all datacenters in this region. Looking for legacy fire suppression systems which may still be active or in existence.
3. The removal of the links to the power supply control systems from fire suppression systems removing the bridge that will allow an alert on one system impacting another.
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey: https://aka.ms/J2T1-PLZ