RCA - Multiple Services - UK South
Summary of impact: Between 20:48 UTC on 20 February 2018 and 00:02 UTC on 21 February 2018, a subset of customers in UK South may have experienced difficulties connecting to resources hosted in the region. Impacted services during this time included Azure Search, Virtual Machines, Storage, Azure Site Recovery, and Backup. Some virtual machines may have experienced unexpected reboots. Root cause and mitigation: On 20 February 2018, engineers were performing Datacenter build-out operations in the UK South Datacenter. This type of operation is managed on a regular basis with no impact to customers. During the operation, the additional nodes that were being added to the Datacenter encountered an issue and needed manual input in order to power cycle before continuing the automated build-out process. The engineer responsible for executing the manual step had previously been engaged in investigating an unrelated issue on a production scale unit and had acquired access to this scale unit through standard justin-time procedures. While using an internal dev-ops tool, the engineer executed the manual power cycle on the scale unit that was already in production instead of the one in build-out. The nodes power cycled as expected and customers services returned to health once this power cycle had completed. During initial investigation, this issue showed signs of a Datacenter hardware power issue. After the detailed investigation, engineers confirmed that the Datacenter power hardware operated as expected, without any unexpected gap in power supply, as this issue was initiated by the commands executed during build-out. Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to): - Temporarily removing bulk power cycle capabilities from the operations tool. - Broadly reviewing all bulk operation tooling. - Instituting stricter controls by throttling the operations and requiring additional approvals. - We will also improve logging so that we can quickly distinguish between power events and power cycles. Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey: https://survey.microsoft.com/618897
