Virtual Machines - North Central US
Summary of impact: Between 21:39 on 9 Apr 2019 and 6:20 UTC on 10 Apr 2019, a subset of customers using Virtual Machines in North Central US may have experienced connection failures when trying to access some Virtual Machines hosted in the region. These Virtual Machines may have also restarted unexpectedly. Some residual impact was detected, impacting a small subset of recovered Virtual Machine connectivity with the underlying disk storage.
Root cause: Azure Storage team made a configuration change on 9 April 2019 at 21:30 UTC to our back-end infrastructure in North Central US to improve performance and latency consistency for Azure Disks running inside Azure Virtual Machines. This change was designed to be transparent to customers. It was enabled following our normal deployment process, first to our test environment, and lower impact scale units before being rolled out to the North Central US region. However, this region hit bugs which impacted customer VM availability. Due to a bug, VM hosts were able to establish session with the storage scale unit but hit issues when trying to receive/send data from/to storage scale unit. This situation was designed to be handled with fallback to our existing data path, but an additional bug led to failure in the fallback path and resulted in in VM reboots.
Mitigation: The system automatically recovered. Some of the customer VMs which didn’t auto recover, needed an additional recovery step.
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our
processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to):
We have paused further deployment of this configuration change until the underlying bugs are fixed [complete].
Fix bugs that caused the background operation to have customer-facing impact [in progress].
Additional validation rigor to cover the scenario that caused the bugs to be missed in test environment [in progress].