RCA - Service Management Failures - West Europe
Summary of impact: Between approximately 15:20 UTC on 27 Mar 2019 and 17:30 UTC on 28 Mar 2019, a subset of customers may have received failure notifications when performing service management operations such as create, update, deploy, scale, and delete for resources hosted in the West Europe region.
Root cause and mitigation:
Root Cause: Regional Network Manager (RNM) is a core component of the network control plane in Azure. RNM is an infrastructure service that works with another component called the Network Service provider (NRP) to orchestrate the network control plane and drive the networking goal state on host machines. Days leading up to the incident, peak load in RNM’s partition manager sub-component had been increasing steadily due to organic growth and load spikes. In anticipation of this, the engineering team had prepared a code improvement to the lock acquisition logic to enhance the efficiency of queue draining and improve performance. On the day of the incident, before the change could be deployed, the load increased sharply, concentrating on a few subscriptions. This pushed RNM to a tipping point. The load caused operations to time out, resulting in failures. Most of the load was concentrated on a few subscriptions, leading to lock contentions where one thread was waiting on the other, causing a slow drain of operations. The gateway component in RNM started to aggressively add the failures back in to the queue as retries, leading to a rapid snowball effect. Higher layers in the stack such as ARM and Compute Resource Provider (CRP) further aggravated load with retries.
Mitigation: To mitigate the situation and restore RNM to its standard operating levels, the reties had to be stopped. A hotfix to stop the gateway component in RNM from adding retry jobs to the queue was successfully applied. In addition, the few subscriptions that were generating peak load were blocked from sending control plane requests to West Europe. Timeout value to obtain locks was extended to help operations succeed. As a result, RNM recovered steadily and the load returned to operating levels. Finally the originally planned code change was rolled out to all replicas of the RNM, bringing RNM back to its standard operating levels and providing it the ability to take higher loads and improving its performance.
Next steps:
We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. This includes (but is not limited to):
Improve lock contention in RNM
Improve RNM performance and scale out capacity with enough headroom Mechanisms to throttle workload before RNM service hits tipping point
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey at https://aka.ms/Q6DN-3BG