RCA - Network Connectivity - DNS Resolution
Summary of impact: Between 19:29 and 22:35 UTC on 02 May 2019, customers may have experienced connectivity issues with Microsoft cloud services including
Azure, Microsoft 365, Dynamics 365 and Azure DevOps. Most services were recovered by 21:40 UTC with the remaining recovered by 22:35 UTC.
Root cause: As part of planned maintenance activity, Microsoft engineers executed a configuration change to update one of the name servers for DNS zones used to reach several Microsoft services, including Azure Storage and Azure SQL Database. A failure in the change process resulted in one of the four name servers' records for these zones to point to a DNS server having blank zone data and returning negative responses. The result was that approximately 25% of the queries for domains used by these services (such as database.windows.net) produced incorrect results, and reachability to these services was degraded. Consequently, multiple other Azure and Microsoft services that depend upon these core services were also impacted to varying degrees.
More details: This incident resulted from the coincidence of two separate errors. Either error by itself would have been non-impacting:
1) Microsoft engineers executed a name server delegation change to update one name server for several Microsoft zones including Azure Storage and Azure SQL Database. Each of these zones has four name servers for redundancy, and the update was made to only one name server during this maintenance. A misconfiguration in the parameters of the automation being used to make the change resulted in an incorrect delegation for the name server under maintenance. 2) As an artifact of automation from prior maintenance, empty zone files existed on servers that were not the intended target of the assigned delegation. This by itself was not a problem as these name servers were not serving the zones in question.
Due to the configuration error in change automation in this instance, the name server delegation made during the maintenance targeted a name server that had an empty copy of the zones. As a result, this name server replied with negative (nxdomain) answers to all queries in the zones. Since only one out of the four name server's records for the zones was incorrect, approximately one in four queries for the impacted zones would have received an incorrect negative response.
DNS resolvers may cache negative responses for some period of time (negative caching), so even though erroneous configuration was promptly fixed, customers continued to be impacted by this change for varying lengths of time.
Mitigation: To mitigate the issue, Microsoft engineers corrected the delegation issue by reverting the name server value to the previous setting. Engineers verified that all responses were then correct, and the DNS resolvers began returning correct results within 5 minutes. Some applications and services that accessed the incorrect values and cached the results may have experienced longer restoration times until the expiration of the incorrect cached information.
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to):
1) Additional checks in the code that performs nameserver updates to prevent unintended changes [in progress].
2) Pre-execution modeling to accurately predict the outcome of the change and detect potential problems before execution [in progress].
3) Improve per-zone, per-nameserver monitors to immediately detect changes that cause one nameserver’s drift from the others [in progress]. 4) Improve DNS namespace design to better allow staged rollouts of changes with lower incremental impact [in progress].
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://aka.ms/R50C-5RZ