RCA - Service Management/Authentication Errors - Azure China (Tracking ID SND4-L80)
Summary of Impact: Between 21:03 CST (UTC+8) on 05 Mar 2020 and 16:03 CST on 06 Mar 2020, a subset of customers in the Azure China regions may have encountered failures when performing service management operations on resources hosted in these regions. Customers may also have experienced authentication failures when attempting to access the Azure portal or other Azure resources in the Azure China regions.
Root Cause: When clients connect to an Azure service, they validate the Transport Layer Security (TLS) certificate of that Azure service. This validation requires access to an Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) service and Certificate Revocation List (CRL).
Azure in China uses an external Certificate Authority (CA). This CA hosts the OCSP and CRL endpoints on remote locations. Those endpoints were not reachable from clients in China during the incident. This issue was in a telecom provider and it impacted both Azure and other customers of the CA. It caused clients to fail certificate validation, which in turn caused failure in connecting to Azure services.
These OCSP and CRL endpoints are mirrored in multiple locations via a Content Distribution Network (CDN).
Mitigation: To mitigate, engineers updated DNS records to re-route clients to alternate OCSP and CRL endpoints that were reachable. The troubleshooting took time as multiple companies were involved in the network path. Some Azure services were able to mitigate sooner by deploying the latest CRL to their servers out-of-band.
Next Steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to):​
Work with our telecom partner in China to address the root cause of why the primary CRL and OCSP endpoints were not reachable. Improve the resiliency of our certificate infrastructure, including hosting the CRL and OCSP endpoints closer to Azure servers.
Provide feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://aka.ms/SND4-L80