RCA- Issues connecting to resources in East US (Tracking ID 9SS0-VT8)
Summary of Impact: Between 15:30 and 22:00 UTC on 03 March 2020, a subset of customers in East US may have experienced issues connecting to resources in this region.
Root Cause: A malfunction in building automation control caused temperatures in multiple rooms of a data center in the East US region to spike impacting Storage, Compute, Networking and other dependent services. Although the cooling system has N+1 redundancy, the automation failure resulted in a significant reduction in cooling air flow. This caused a cascade of events which caused network devices to become unresponsive, VMs to shutdown, and some storage hardware to go offline.
Mitigation: The malfunction in the building automation control was fixed by resetting the controllers for the cooling system. Due to the nature of the automation failure, each cooling unit had to be manually reset. By 16:00 UTC the cooling controller was back online and ambient temperatures and air flow had returned to normal ranges. Engineers then power cycled and restored failed server hardware in groups to restore services in the region. After recovery of the building and network infrastructure, engineers recovered storage hardware and compute VMs that did not recover automatically. By 22:00 UTC, 99.999% of affected VMs were back up and running. Availability of all storage data was restored.
Next steps: We sincerely apologize for the impact to affected customers. We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to):
Review of the building automation control system responsible for this incident, mitigation of any issues if found, and application of the mitigation to other data centers with the same control system
Review of mechanical cooling system, mitigation of any issues if found, and application of the mitigation to other data centers with the same cooling system. Provide Feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://aka.ms/9SS0-VT8