RCA - Azure connectivity issues (Tracking ID 0TSQ-TT0)
Summary of impact: Between 15:01 and 16:30 UTC on 20 Jan 2020, a subset of customers in Sweden, Finland, Norway, and Russia may have experienced increased latency or difficulties connecting to Azure services. Impact to customers was based on the location of the customer. Customers in other geographic regions would have continued to be able to access resources during this time.
Root Cause: Microsoft has numerous "Edge Sites" on its network which greatly enhance the connectivity experience for Microsoft users in geographic regions where Edge sites exist. Starting at 15:01 UTC on 20th Jan 2020, a multiple fiber-cut event isolated the Stockholm and Helsinki Azure Edge sites, impacting internet traffic routing via these regions to the wider Microsoft network. For resiliency, these edge sites typically have 2 degrees of connectivity, but in this case, both paths went offline at the exact same time. Further investigation determined that the two diverse paths collapsed into the same conduit for a section outside Stockholm, and this is where the cut happened. Traffic to/from the internet towards Microsoft automatically shifted to other Edge sites in Europe, but the change in path and increase in traffic caused longer latency for some customers.
Mitigation: Microsoft properties in the impacted regions were asked to migrate to other locations to minimize impact. Once this migration completed, the impact to customers was mitigated. In addition, the Microsoft WAN team procured capacity from a different fiber path to bring the impacted sites back online. All sites were fully operational by 2020-01-21 21:18 UTC.
Next Steps: We are continuously taking steps to improve the Microsoft Azure Platform and our processes to help ensure such incidents do not occur in the future. In this case, this includes (but is not limited to):
Improve the speed at which traffic can be routed to other regions to mitigate the impact.
Harden the fiber infrastructure in Stockholm and Helsinki to make it more resilient to multiple fiber cuts.
Review of Edge Site connectivity architecture to ensure that there are no other circuit-convergences that inadvertently cause a single point of failure.
Provide Feedback: Please help us improve the Azure customer communications experience by taking our survey https://aka.ms/0TSQ-TT0